# Project Sketch - Master Thesis

### Resarch Question

Wildfires present a major environmental hazard in American West. The 2020 wildfires in California and Oregon have grown to a record-breaking scope with an area the size of 2.7m hectares having been burnt as of September 16th, 2020 (National Interagency Fire Center 2020). Understanding which factors can trigger wildires and how to predict their occurrences is essential for policymakers. With the advances in Machine Learning and data collection of the recent years, a new array of tools has become available to model wildfire occurrences and predict wildfire susceptibility of affected areas. The goal of this study is to make use of of Machine Learning tools and procedures to best model wildfire occurrences and create fire susceptibility maps for the American West, including the states of California, Oregon and Washington. 

Hence this proposed study aims to answer the following questions:

*How do different Machine Learning algorithms perform in modeling wildfire occurrence in the American West?* 

*Which of the provided features contribute the largest predictive power for modeling wildfire occurrence in the American West?*

### Literature

Various case studies on wildfire occurrences have already been performed, with a large variety of methodological tools. One early example of the use of Machine Learning tools in this field is the case study on modeling fire occurrence in Mediterranean Europe performed by Oliveira and co-authors (Oliveira et al. 2012). They used the *average density* of fire occurrences at the NUTS3-level of provinces as the dependent variable, as a proxy of fire ignition. This calculation was done using kernel density estimation methods with data of fire occurrence for Portugal, Spain, France, Italy and Greece during the period of 2000-2007 and only included data from June to September. The features used for predicting the density of fire occurrences fall within six categories of data: topography, land cover, climate, infrastructures, demographic variables and socio-economic variables. In order to model both linear and non-linear trends, this study used the Multiple Linear Regression (LR) and Random Forest (RF) algorithms for modeling, estimating multiple models based on five subsets of training data, randomly sampled with replacement. A final model was estimated using only features that display a *p*-value smaller than 0.05 and a *t*-statistic larger than 2 in at least 3 out of the five estimated models per algorithm. Random Forest turned out to display a larger predictive accuracy than the LR-model, also reducing spatial autocorrelation in model residuals to a higher degree. For both models, the feature with the highest predictive power was the off-season precipitation. For the RF model, unemployment was evaluated as the second most important feature, pointing toward the importance of socio-economic features in predicting wildfires. Overall there were eight shared features in both final models, which asserts their importance for the prediction of fire-density distribution. In a final step the authors create a wildfire susceptibility mapping for the observed area, based on the predictions of both final models.

A more focused look at the Mediterranean was taken by Tonini and co-authors, focusing on this single region of Liguria (Tonini et al. 2020). They leveraged data on burned areas from a 20-year period (1997-2017) to assess wildifire susceptibility of the region, dividing the data into subsets for the winter season (November - April) and the summer season (May-October). Unlike the study conducted by Oliveira and co-authors, who used the continuous variable of average *density* of fire occurrences as the target, Tonini and co-authors designed their model as a binary classification case, distinguishing between *burnt* and *unburnt* areas. Since pixels on their created GIS-map are treated as individual samples, this binary approach allows for the creation of very detailed fire susceptibility maps, since for every individual pixel a probabilistic value for being *burnt* is calculated by the model. As features, the authors used variables describing the topography, land cover of the region and the distance to anthropogenic features such as urban areas and roads. No features capturing demographics or socio-economics were used in this model. In a second step, additional variables identifying the vegetaion of neighboring pixels were added to the model to test if these features proved useful in predicting whether fires would occur in a given pixel. The authors estimated models for each combination of season, inclusion or exclusion of the features on neighboring vegetation and various numbers of folds for cross validation. All of these models were estimated using Random Forest. K-fold cross validation was implemented in order to mitigate spatial autocorrelation by grouping the individual pixels into square-shaped blocks that were then sampled training and validation folds. The final evaluation of the models was conducted on a testing dataset defined by subsetting the data to the last 6 years of analysis (25% of the entire data). The best performing models were evaluated using 5-fold cross validation and the neighboring vegetation features for both seasons. The model showed good global predictive power in both seasons, discriminating between burnt and unburnt areas within the 75th percentile. The authors stress the importance of using k-fold cross validation in order to mitigate spatial autocorrelation (holding training and validation data away from each other) and the inclusion of the neighboring vegetation features for future studies. 

Martínez and co-authors focused strictly on the human factors of wildfire ignition in their case study on Spain (Martínez et al. 2009). Their model predicts human-caused wildfire in Spain using fire data from 1988 to 2000 at municipality level. For their target variable they leveraged the continuous *human ignition risk index* provided by the Spanish Forest Service. Based on this data they created a binary categorical target variable, taking on two possible outcomes: high or low human risk. Their used features fall into the following categories: socio-economic transformations in rural areas, human presence and socio-economic transformations in urban areas, persistence or transformation of traditional activities linked to fire in rural areas, accidental or negligent events linked to fire, landscape structure and housing patterns, indirect factors of intentional fires and forest policy. Employing a more traditional statistical approach, the authors estimate their model using logistic regression analysis. The conclude that their model provides good predictions of human-caused fire risk, using only structural variables in the process. 

A diverse set of algorithms is employed by Ghorbanzadeh and co-authors in their case study on wildfire susceptibility for Amol County, northern Iran (Ghorbanzadeh 2019). They created their own dataset based on the MODIS fire-event database, which provides daily shapefiles on global active wildfires. Features on topography, meteorology, vegetation and anthropological factors (such as distance to inhabited areas and roads) were added. This study too disregards demographic or socio-economic features. A variety of models were trained on burn data from 2012-2017 at pixel level. The authors used 4-fold cross validation for all models. Separate models were estimated using an Artificial Neural Network (ANN), a Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Random Forest (RF). Overall the RF model was found to have the highest prediction performance. Wildfire susceptibility maps were again created based on the pixel-level probability of being classified as a burnt area. The authors conclude by recommending their workflow based on the MODIS database and using multiple algorithms to train through 4-fold CV for other areas of study.  

### Theory

This paper follows the argument of the existing literature that fire occurrence and fire susceptibility can be modeled with environmental, demographic and socio-economic data. The aforementioned studies have demonstrated a high predictive power of these predictors for wildfire occurrences, even if only a subset of these predictors is used for modeling. The Random Forest algorithm has proven to be a popular and effective algorithm for classification cases, seeing widespread application in the existing literature on wildfire prediction. 

### Research Design

Following the examples of the discussed literature this proposed paper aims to model wildfire occurrences in the American West as a binary classification case. The resulting probabilitstic output will then be used to create fire susceptibility maps of the studied areas. 

A large part of the data preparation will be conducted in ArcGIS, compiling a wildfire inventory dataset based on shapefiles of the study area. These data are provided by the MODIS fire database at the 1km$^2$ pixel level. Additionally, topographical, meteorological, demographic and socio-economic data will be joined to each pixel , if appropriate quality can be assessed. The final source for these data has not been decided yet, although there is a wealth of geospatial and demographic data being published by a variety of institutions such as [UC Berkeley Geospatial Innovation Facility](http://gif.berkeley.edu/resources/data_subject.html), the [United States Geological Survey](https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/ngp/tnm-delivery/gis-data-download), [University of Oregon Libraries](https://researchguides.uoregon.edu/gis/data) and the [United States Census Bureau](https://www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/tiger-data.html). Once joined and compiled this dataset will be exported in tabular shape, where a single sample consists of a monthly 1km$^2$ pixel of the study area, enriched with all the found and joined features. Using data from 2000 up until 2020 would ensure a relatively large period of analysis, while also including the most recent and historically large wildfires of 2020.

Modeling will be conducted using multiple algorithms that are well suited for classification cases: logistic regression, Random Forest and a Gradient Boosting Machine. None of the mentioned literature has made use of gradient boosting, despite its rise to popularity in the machine learning community in recent years (particularly the *xgboost* implementation). In line with the literature appropriate hyperparameter tuning and cross-validation will be employed. The performance of the estimated model will be measured using *accuracy*, *F1 score* and *AUC* to enable meaningful comparison of performance. 

The best performing model will be used to estimate a fire susceptibility map by transforming the probabilistic prediction output into either a categorical wildfire risk assessment or using it as a raw probability of each individual sample having a predicted wildfire occurrence.  

### Literature

- Ghorbanzadeh Omid, Kamran Khalil Valizadeh, Blaschke Thomas, Aryal Jagannath, Naboureh Amin, Einali Jamshid, Bian Jinhu (2019): Spatial prediction of wildfire susceptibility using field survey GPS data and machine learning approaches. *Fire* 2, no. 3: 43.
- Martínez Jesús, Vega-Garcia Cristina, Chuvieco Emili (2009): Human-caused wildfire risk rating for prevention planning in Spain. *Journal of environmental management* 90, no. 2: 1241-1252.
- National Interagency Fire Center (2020): Additional military personnel mobilized to provide wildfire support. (https://www.nifc.gov/fireInfo/fireInfo_documents/NR_2020MilitaryActivation091620.pdf [25.01.2021]).
- Oliveira Sandra, Oehler Frederike, San-Miguel-Ayanz Jesús, Camia Andrea, Pereira José M.C. (2012): Modeling spatial patterns of fire occurrence in Mediterranean Europe using multiple regression and random forest. *Forest Ecol Manag* 275: 117–129.
- Tonini Marj, D’Andrea Mirko, Biondi Guido, Degli Esposti Silvia, Trucchia Andrea, Fiorucci Paol (2020): A Machine Learning-Based Approach for Wildfire Susceptibility Mapping. The Case Study of the Liguria Region in Italy. *Geosciences* 10, no. 3: 105.

